This is the rainforest of Panama,
and these are American soldiers.
They're back in the coastal country
after a 25-year hiatus
for jungle training
alongside Panamanian forces.
So why are they back now?
For a long time we were
focused on many other things
and we forgot about our neighborhood.
What we are seeing with
President Trump is a refocus
on the Western Hemisphere.
The training is part of the
biggest US military buildup in
Latin America in decades, and comes
after the shock seizure
of Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro.
Trump has clearly embraced what he sees
as a big success in Venezuela.
He was able to take out
Nicolás Maduro with no loss
of US soldiers' lives.
Now, there are governments in the region
that have backed Trump.
We saw in March a gathering in Miami
of like-minded, right wing
Latin American leaders willing
to partner with the US,
willing to coordinate,
may be willing to submit, frankly.
- We come together to
announce a brand new military
coalition to eradicate
the criminal cartels
plaguing our region.
But there are many voices
who are opposed to this
who do not think an expanded
US military presence is a
recipe for a stable,
prosperous Latin America.
Alright, listen up. We're
gonna head to your survival
PE. Squad one and squad three,
we'll push out. Squad two,
you'll fill in behind.
All right, let's go.
Last year, the US defense
chief announced in Panama
that there would be a revival
of three military bases in Panama.
There's a long history here.
- And fellow citizens.
Last night I ordered US
military forces to Panama.
No president takes such action lightly.
There was an invasion,
hundreds, if not thousands
of people were killed back in
1989 when authoritarian leader
Manuel Noriega was taken out.
Jungle training had been going
on in Panama really since the
1950s
through 1999 when treaties
required the US military
to turn over its bases
and of course turn over
the Panama Canal to Panama.
So it's been a quarter-century
hiatus from when the
trainings were last happening to now.
First and foremost, if called upon
to serve in any capacity
in a jungle environment,
that is the first adversary
is understanding how
to survive and operate there.
You're dealing with
triple canopy coverage.
You have a ton of water
and rain that you're contending
with on a day-to-day basis.
So it's gonna be a little bit difficult
'cause maybe a lot of you guys haven't
utilized a machete, right?
This is a rare and
unique opportunity for us
to apply our skills where
you have to learn how to live
with limited logistics.
I think if you can operate in the jungle,
you can operate almost anywhere.
No one I've talked to has said
that these jungle
trainings mean there will
be future strikes.
No one's said that, but I think it's clear
that the US military are
making sure they're ready.
There's a lot of jungle terrain
in the western hemisphere.
Columbia has jungles, Mexico has jungles.
Cuba has jungles, many other
places too in the Americas.
It's clear they're training
for the possibility
of future operations.
This past December,
the Trump administration published
its new national security
strategy, and this really came
as a shock to some people.
It was pretty clear that
there was a pivot to a kind
of a more muscular,
more aggressive US
posture toward the region.
Many people talked about a, a revival
or reinterpretation of
the Monroe Doctrine.
This 200-year-old doctrine named
after the fifth US President, that in
that time really sought to kind
of expel European powers
from the Americas.
Literally a month
after this new national security
strategy was announced was
the operation to capture
Nicolás Maduro in Venezuela.
That followed an unprecedented military
buildup in the Caribbean.
And of course since then
there have been operations
in, in Ecuador.
There's talk of operations in Cuba,
but there is support
for the United States doing things
that these countries have not
been able to do themselves.
There has been kind of an
epic story of human movement
where people are fleeing bad places
or places where there is
no economic opportunity
or really repressive governments.
So I think that's part of the,
the argument the Trump
administration is making here in
terms of why it needs a muscular
approach to Latin America.
Panama is clearly important
because of this major shipping channel
that is super important for global trade.
Something like 5% of global
trade passes through the canal,
around three quarters of
the cargo ships that go
through are linked to US
imports or US exports.
So it is a major logistical
piece of the US economy.
You can't have economic
prosperity without security.
There's two countries and only
two per the neutrality treaty
that are required to
unilaterally protect the canal
irrespective of each other.
And that's Panama and the United States.
And hopefully nothing ever happens.
Hopefully all of the things
that we plan, hopefully all
of the things that we trained for,
we don't actually ever
have to put them into use.
But the reality is you have to be ready.
- My administration will be
reclaiming the Panama Canal
and we've already started doing it.
Early on, Trump was
talking about the need
to retake the canal. On the street level,
this was a very controversial comment.